feat(51/WAKU2-RELAY-SHARDING): Autosharding update (#607)
vacp2p/rfc: content/docs/rfcs/51/README.md

> It is RECOMMENDED for App protocols to follow the naming structure detailed in [23/WAKU2-TOPICS](/spec/23/).

Reviewer: feel free to address this at a different PR, but

> It is RECOMMENDED for App protocols to follow the naming structure detailed in [23/WAKU2-TOPICS](/spec/23/).

guess its not true anymore. this RFC introduces a new pubsub topic format that wont be compatible with the sharding one. eg `/waku/2/{topic-name}` (specified in spec 23 is no longer valid)

Author: We will have to revisit RFC23 for sure. For now `/waku/2/myname` is valid for both autosharding (short format) and RFC23.

# Automatic Sharding

Autosharding selects shards automatically and is the default behavior for shard choice.
The other choices being static and named sharding as seen in previous sections.
Shards (pubsub topics) SHOULD be computed from content topics with the procedure below.

## Rendezvous Hashing

Also known as the Highest Random Weight (H.R.W.) method, has many properties useful for shard selection.

> - Distributed agreement. Local only computation without communication.

Reviewer 2: Instead of _Distributed agreement_, wouldn't you call this _non-interactive consensus_?
As the strong part of this is that it's "without communication" , ie, non-interactive.

Also, consensus seems more appropriate because there is a consensus of all nodes that a given content topic goes on a given shard. Not really an "agreement" per se which seems to be more of an interactive notion.

Author: The definition of consensus is a general agreement. I'll remove the confusing words.

- Load balancing. Content topics are spread as equally as possible to shards.

> - Minimal disruption. Content topics switch shards infrequently.

Reviewer: why "infrequently" and not "never"? ensuring the mapping contentTopic->shard should be always static imho, even when changing the amount of shards.

Author: If an app follow generations changes it might switch shards otherwise (default) it will not.

Reviewer: i see. understand that this is not trivial, but leaving this responsability to the app is scary. someone will for sure do it wrong by not following generations and their messages will end up who knows where. unsure on the solution though.

Reviewer 3: Mmm. Even if an app change generation, I don't see how the content topic has switched shards? Moving your app to a new generation would mean changing the content topic, so the "original" content topic should still not switch shards?

Author: > i see. understand that this is not trivial, but leaving this responsability to the app is scary. someone will for sure do it wrong by not following generations and their messages will end up who knows where. unsure on the solution though.

The default is not doing anything (not following generations). So if they choose to do something then it's on them to not fuck it up.

> Mmm. Even if an app change generation, I don't see how the content topic has switched shards? Moving your app to a new generation would mean changing the content topic, so the "original" content topic should still not switch shards?

True "technically" :P

- Low overhead. Easy to compute.

### Algorithm

> For each shard,

Reviewer 2: How is the `cluster` value chosen?

Author: That question and maybe a redesign of "shard space" should happen in another PR.

Reviewer 3: I agree. We don't have to make all changes in this PR. In fact, shard selection/allocation may be removed completely from this spec and go into a separate "TWN Gen 0" spec in future so we can separate the concepts (stable) from the opinionated implementation in each gen network (unstable, or at least possibly changing for each generation)

hash using Sha2-256 the concatenation of

> the content topic `application` field (N U.T.F.-8 bytes),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the content topic `application` field (N UTF-8 bytes),
```
UTF-8 acronyms is usually spelled without periods: https://www.unicode.org/faq/utf_bom.html#UTF8

Reviewer 4: Shall we just mention only "N bytes"?
The concept of "UTF-8 bytes" sounds a bit confusing to me as each UTF-8 symbol con be encoded from 1 to 4 bytes.

Author: I'll change it to  utf8 string of n bytes might be clearer.

`version` (N U.T.F.-8 bytes),

> the `cluster` index (2 bytes) and

Reviewer: i thought we were going to avoid this `cluster` concept. a shard is a shard, but why having this `cluster`? imho we dont need this new "namespace".

we had related discussions during the offsite, but perhaps you were not present.
can only find this: https://notes.status.im/waku-offsite-23-day-2#the-idea

Author: We may rename it `network id` but the way the space is divided into 2^16 indices of 1024 shards will not change in this PR.

Reviewer: i see.
* why 2^16? isnt it too much. we should be able to count the networks with the fingers of our hands, so i would suggest 4 or 8 to be covered, but not 16.
* why 1024? afaik this would be the number of shards that we define in each generation? we were going to launch with 10, 20ish?

Author: @alrevuelta I agree we should change it but it's out of scope for this PR.

the `shard` index (2 bytes)
take the first 64 bits of the hash,

> divided by 2^64,

Reviewer 4: As per the example below, this should be 2^64 - 1.
Btw, I really appreciate the example. Life is better with examples :)

compute the natural logarithm of this number then
take the negative of the weight (default 1.0) divided by it.
Finally, sort the shard value pairs.

The shard with the highest value SHOULD be used.

### Example
| Field | Value | Hex |
|---    |---    |---  |
| `application`| "myapp"| 0x6d79617070|
| `version`    | "1"    | 0x31
| `cluster`    | 1      | 0x0001
| `shard`      | 6      | 0x0006

- SHA2-256 of `0x6d796170703100010006` is `0xfdac5fb315b791cca3ccde738ebb0b8d2742519fce1086f2a3d2409cb22a7dd2`
- The first 64 bits `0xfdac5fb315b791cc` divided by `0xffffffffffffffff` is ~`0.99`
- The natural logarithm of `0.99` is ~`-0.01`
- `-1` divided by `-0.01` equals ~`99.5`

> - Shard 6 has the priority value 99.5

Reviewer 2: Can 2 shards have the same priority value?
Maybe good to list priority values for all shards for this example (not in details, just final result) so then we an also say: _which means for `/myapp/1/foobar/proto`, the shard N should be used.

Author: Yes they could but 1 chance in 2^64 is negligible.

## Content Topics Format for Autosharding
Content topics MUST follow the format in [23/WAKU2-TOPICS](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/23/#content-topic-format).
In addition, 2 prefixes MAY be added to content topics.
Generation & bias.
When omitted default values are used.
Generation default value is `0`.
Bias default value is `unbiased`.

> - The full length format is `{generation}/{bias}/{application-name}/{version-of-the-application}/{content-topic-name}/{encoding}`

Reviewer: i hate ambiguity, so i would suggest just one way of expressing the content topic. so i would suggest using only use the full length and removing the short one.

Author: It would not be backward compatible with the current format.

- The short length format is `/{application-name}/{version-of-the-application}/{content-topic-name}/{encoding}`

### Example

> - Full length `/0/unbiased/myapp/1/mytopic/cbor`

Reviewer 2: full length format L222 does not have a leading `/` but yet there is one in the example.

- Short length `/myapp/1/mytopic/cbor`

### Generation
The generation number monotonously increases and indirectly refers to the total number of shards of the Waku Network.

The first generation (zero) MUST use 8 shards in total.
The cluster index is 1 and the indices of each shards are numbered 0 to 7.

> This document will be updated for future generations.

Reviewer 2: Which means that we will never mark this document as stable until we are "done adding shards". Are we sure about this being the best strategy?
Or shall we do that for now but at some point in the future, defer the definition of a new shard to a new RFC?

Author: :thinking: Can we not update stable RFC at all? If we add another one it's never going to be stable either, same problem no? One RFC for each generation? Seams overkill.

Author: I added an invisible note in the file.

Do nothing now. Add new generations RFC when promoted to draft or stable.

### Bias

> Bias is used to skew the priority of shards via weights.

Reviewer 2: May be worth mentioning what kind of functionality we are trying to provide by introducing the concept of bias.

Reviewer 4: I agree with @fryorcraken comment but I'd also add more detail re the expected values range for this field and what is the implication of having a lower or higher `bias` value.

Reviewer: this bias thingy seems a bit weird to me, mind ellaborating more on why you want to bias this?

reading this

> bias is used to skew the priority values via the weighting function in a specific way.

> One of the requirement was to allow app the affect the sharding, to this end a simple 20/80 split between higher shards and lower shards has been added.The lower 20% of shards will be picked more often when adding the "lower20" bias in the topic and "higher80" would favor the other shards.

I get its meant to "bias" the shard selection, but imho we shouldnt have this feature. ofc anyone can "golf" the shard by appending stuff to the content topic (similar to vanity-eth with addresses) but imho this should be as obscure as possible, so that people just use the shard they are assigned to.

thin also from a app/user perspective. I set my app name, some topic nameand, "bias"? what is this? which number do i chose 1, 5, 100? content topic should abstract sharding away, and this bias introduces some coupling. more cognitive load to users for a feature that imho we dont need.

Author: > May be worth mentioning what kind of functionality we are trying to provide by introducing the concept of bias.

None right now. It's reserved for future use.

>I agree with @fryorcraken comment but I'd also add more detail re the expected values range for this field and what is the implication of having a lower or higher bias value.

The only value right now is `unbiased`.

> this bias thingy seems a bit weird to me, mind ellaborating more on why you want to bias this?

For what I understood of the requirements we did NOT want an algorithm with only one input (content topic) but something more flexible.

As for my opinion, I do not like autosharding and specifically trying to do anything fancier than picking a shard at random.
I'm all for removing any `bias`.

@jm-clius might want to chime in.

Reviewer 3: > I'm all for removing any bias.

I think we can remove it (in fact, even with it removed, nothing would prevent us from experimenting with different ways of hashing ourselves, but I agree it's better to keep the specs clear of this).

> For what I understood of the requirements we did NOT want an algorithm with only one input 

From my side at least, the question was whether we should have a way to still optionally hardcode shard selection (not simply bias it) into the content topic, but we agreed elsewhere that this won't be needed for now. Other than that, I think our best approach is a simple hash of the app/version parts of the (single input) content topic.

Reviewer: noice, lets remove the concept of bias then.

Author: deal!

Reviewer 2: Is that the discussion that led to the introduction of _bias_ ? https://github.com/waku-org/nwaku/pull/1854#discussion_r1276975061

My statement still hold that while we can keep things obscure and just instruct dev to choose 1 _application_ value and whatever _name_ value for their content topic, I would also keep in our back pocket the ability to instruct an application to use different _application_ values if they need to scale beyond a shard capacity.

Other biases than `unbiased` are unspecified for now but may be used in the future.

### Topic Design
Content topics have 2 purposes: filtering and routing.
Filtering is done by changing the `{content-topic-name}` field.
As this part is not hashed, it will not affect routing (shard selection).
The `{application-name}` and `{version-of-the-application}` fields do affect routing.
Using multiple content topics with different `{application-name}` field has advantages and disadvantages.
It increases the traffic a relay node is subjected to when subscribed to all topics.
It also allows relay and light nodes to subscribe to a subset of all topics.

## Problems

### Hot Spots

Hot spots occur (similar to DHTs), when a specific mesh network (shard) becomes responsible for (several) large multicast groups (content topics).
The opposite problem occurs when a mesh only carries multicast groups with very few participants: this might cause bad connectivity within the mesh.

> The current autosharding method cannot solve this problem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The current autosharding method does not solve this problem.
```
Sounds better, no?

> A new version of autosharding based on network traffic measurements could be designed but would require further research and development.

Reviewer 2: Instead, I'd defer:

> *Note:* Automatic sharding based on network traffic measurements to avoid hot spots in not part of this specification.

### Discovery

For the discovery of automatic shards this document specifies two methods (the second method will be detailed in a future version of this document).

The first method uses the discovery introduced above in the context of static shards.
Each cluster index can be seen as a hash bucket.

> Rendezvous hashing maps content topics in one of these buckets.

Reviewer 2: I thought rendezvous hashing was mapping content topics to shards.
Can you clarify how each cluster is hash bucket?

Author: I only changed consistent for rendezvous hashing. What he meant IDK.

Maybe remove this as it's confusing?

# Automatic Sharding

> Autosharding select shards automatically and is the default behaviour for shard choice but opting out is always possible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Autosharding select shards automatically and is the default behaviour for shard choice.
Opting out is always possible by explicitly configuring pubsub topic subscription
and destinations for publishing messages.
```

<-- suggestion for more clarity and less context required from elsewhere

> Shards (pubsub topics) not longer have to be chosen, they are instead computed from content topics with the procedure below.

Reviewer 3: Don't think we need to refer to history here "no longer". Perhaps something like:

```suggestion
With autosharding, shards (pubsub topics) do not have to be explicitly indicated,
but are instead computed from content topics with the procedure below.
```

## Rendezvous Hashing

Also known as the Highest Random Weight (HRW) method, has many properties useful for shard selection.
- Distributed agreement. Local only computation without communication.
- Load balancing. Content topics are spread as equally as possible to shards.
- Minimal disruption. Content topics switch shards infrequently.
- Low overhead. Easy to compute.

### Algorithm

For each shard,
hash using Sha2-256 the concatenation of
the content topic `application` field (N UTF-8 bytes),
`version` (N UTF-8 bytes),
the cluster index (2 bytes) and
the shard index (2 bytes)
take the first 64 bits of the hash,
divided by 2^64,
compute the natural logarithm of this number then
take the negative of the weight (default 1.0) divided by it.

> Finally, sort the values and pick the shard with the highest one.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps add a very simple example here?

> ## Content Topic Prefixes

Reviewer 3: Perhaps just title this `Content Topic Format for Autosharding` and have a link back to the general content topic format recommendation in https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/23/#content-topic-format.
This will allow this section to be an easy reference for the format and not just the optional prefixes. When I go this section I want to know:
(1) quick reference of the content topic format I should use
(2) more detail about optional prefixes

> So that apps can manipulate the shard selection, 2 prefixes CAN be added to content topics.

Reviewer 3: `CAN` is not a recognised RFC keyword: https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt Rather use `MAY`.

Author: I didn't think of the keyword that was for emphasis. :P

> So that apps can manipulate the shard selection, 2 prefixes CAN be added to content topics.

Reviewer 3: > added to content topics

What content topics? In other words, think we can make it explicitly that this refers to content topics following recommended format in RFC 23.

Generation & bias.

> When omitted default values are used.

Reviewer 3: State the default values here: generation 0 and no bias.

- Short format `/application/version/subject/encoding`
- Long format `/generation/bias/application/version/subject/encoding`

### Topic design
Content topics have 2 purposes filtering and routing.

> Filtering is done by changing the `subject` field as this part is not hashed, it will not affect routing (shard selection).

Reviewer 3: Suggestion for clearer separate sentence structure.
```suggestion
Filtering is done by changing the `subject` field. 
As this part is not hashed, it will not affect routing (shard selection).
```

The `application` and `version` fields do affect routing.

> Application designer should understand that using different `application` field has a cost.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Application designers should understand that using different `application` fields has a cost.
```

> It increase the traffic a node has to relay when subscribed to all topics but can benefit nodes that only use a subset of topics.

Reviewer 3: Is this strictly true? In other words, if an application uses multiple application fields the impact is that the traffic for that application will be routed in different shards which adds routing complexity and _may_ increase relayed traffic. However, the application could still e.g. use filter to subscribe to content from all these shards without relaying, but this adds complexity.

I think from this RFC's perspective there is no _definitive_ knowledge about implied relay (or not) of different shards - this happens at another layer - but we could add that applications SHOULD consider the added complexity and possible bandwidth implication of possibly splitting their traffic across several shards by using multiple `application` fields. In fact, the recommendation is that application designers SHOULD group traffic that needs to be processed together with the same `application` field and SHOULD use different `application` fields for traffic that can be processed separately, to increase scalability.

Author: > I think from this RFC's perspective there is no definitive knowledge about implied relay (or not) of different shards

True and it also apply to this below.

> application designers SHOULD group traffic that needs to be processed together with the same application field and SHOULD use different application fields for traffic that can be processed separately, to increase scalability.

We can't make that statement either. It's a case by case basis.

Reviewer 3: True, but in the latter case I think the `SHOULD` implies that there's a general best practice scenario here and we might want to be somewhat helpful to those completely new to the concept. But no major objection to leaving this out.

### Generation

> Monotonously increase and indirectly refer to the total number of shards of the Waku network. 

Reviewer 3: For RFCs, we try to use full sentences for clarity, in other words:
"The generation monotonously increases and indirectly...."

Default: `0`

> The first generation (zero) use 8 shards in total.

Reviewer 3: I think we can indicate cluster and index range here now.

This document will be updated with future generation shard numbers.

> Community consensus should be reach before increasing the generation and shards in the network as it would affect everyone.

Reviewer 3: I don't know if this is true? Any application can already use any shard they want. If they agree with our "new generations" they can simply start using that as prefix, but I don't see why consensus is necessary beforehand. Perhaps I'm missing something?

Author: Maybe not consensus but I meant that we are going to communicate with the community about changes.

Even that may not be necessary to mention.

### Bias
Bias is used to skew the priority of shards via weights.

> Unspecified for now but may be used in the future.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is unspecified for now but may be used in the future.
```

Default: `unbiased`

## Problems

### Hotspots

Hot spots occur (similar to DHTs), when a specific mesh network (shard) becomes responsible for (several) large multicast groups (content topics).
The opposite problem occurs when a mesh only carries multicast groups with very few participants: this might cause bad connectivity within the mesh.

The current autosharding methods cannot solve this problem.

> A new version of autosharding based on network traffic mesurements could be designed to migrate content topics from shards to shards but would require further research and development.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A new version of autosharding based on network traffic measurements could be designed to migrate content topics from shards to shards but would require further research and development.
```

"from shards to shards" ? :D

- Local only computation without communication.
- Content topics are spread as equally as possible to shards.
- Content topics switch shards infrequently.
- Easy to compute.

### Algorithm

For each shard,
hash using Sha2-256 the concatenation of
the content topic `application` field (UTF-8 string of N bytes),
`version` (UTF-8 string of N bytes),
the `cluster` index (2 bytes) and
the `shard` index (2 bytes)
take the first 64 bits of the hash,
divided by 2^64-1,
compute the natural logarithm of this number then
take the negative of the weight (default 1.0) divided by it.
Finally, sort the shard value pairs.

The shard with the highest value SHOULD be used.

### Example
| Field | Value | Hex |
|---    |---    |---  |
| `application`| "myapp"| 0x6d79617070|
| `version`    | "1"    | 0x31
| `cluster`    | 1      | 0x0001
| `shard`      | 6      | 0x0006

- SHA2-256 of `0x6d796170703100010006` is `0xfdac5fb315b791cca3ccde738ebb0b8d2742519fce1086f2a3d2409cb22a7dd2`
- The first 64 bits `0xfdac5fb315b791cc` divided by `0xffffffffffffffff` is ~`0.99`
- The natural logarithm of `0.99` is ~`-0.01`
- `-1` divided by `-0.01` equals ~`100`
- Shard 6 has the priority value 100

> For gen0, the shards have priority values; 0.57, -2.18, 1.51, 1.14, 0.65, 0.72, 100, 0.54, content topic `/myapp/1/myname/cbor` should use shard 6

Reviewer: mind explaining how the "priority values" are calculated? eg, for 16 shards what would be the values?

Author: They are calculated with the same process than shard 6. Maybe I should rephrase.

## Content Topics Format for Autosharding
Content topics MUST follow the format in [23/WAKU2-TOPICS](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/23/#content-topic-format).
In addition, a generation prefix MAY be added to content topics.
When omitted default values are used.
Generation default value is `0`.

- The full length format is `/{generation}/{application-name}/{version-of-the-application}/{content-topic-name}/{encoding}`

> - The short length format is `/{application-name}/{version-of-the-application}/{content-topic-name}/{encoding}`

Reviewer: I understand that if the generation is not set, it defaults to 0. But this implies that if the max_shard change, the app using this content topic will have its assigned pubsub topic changed. And we should not allow that. Am i missing something?

This is why I would suggest to **only** use the full length, so that we can ensure that the pubsub topic is calculated properly for everyone.

Author: Gen0 have a definite number of shards that never change. A content topic using the short format will not change shard.

# Automatic Sharding

> Autosharding select shards automatically and is the default behaviour for shard choice.

Reviewer 5: s/select/selects/

Author: Man I had to look this up. I did not even know the rule...

The other choices being static and named sharding as seen in previous sections.

> Shards (pubsub topics) MUST be computed from content topics with the procedure below.

Reviewer 3: I'd say this is a `SHOULD`. Not doing this won't break anything on protocol level, but your application/node would be doing something unsupported.

`version` (N UTF-8 bytes),
the `cluster` index (2 bytes) and
the `shard` index (2 bytes)
take the first 64 bits of the hash,
divided by 2^64,
compute the natural logarithm of this number then
take the negative of the weight (default 1.0) divided by it.
Finally, sort the shard value pairs.

The shard with the highest value MUST be used.

### Example
| Field | Value | Hex |
|---    |---    |---  |
| `application`| "myapp"| 0x6d79617070|
| `version`    | "1"    | 0x31
| `cluster`    | 1      | 0x0001
| `shard`      | 6      | 0x0006

- SHA2-256 of `0x6d796170703100010006` is `0xfdac5fb315b791cca3ccde738ebb0b8d2742519fce1086f2a3d2409cb22a7dd2`
- The first 64 bits `0xfdac5fb315b791cc` divided by `0xffffffffffffffff` is ~`0.99`
- The natual logarithm of `0.99` is ~`-0.01`
- `-1` divided by `-0.01` equals ~`99.5`
- Shard 6 has the priority value 99.5

## Content Topics Format for Autosharding
Content topics MUST follow the format in [23/WAKU2-TOPICS](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/23/#content-topic-format).
In addition, 2 prefixes MAY be added to content topics.
Generation & bias.
When omitted default values are used.
Generation default value is `0`.

> Bias default value is `unbiased`.

Reviewer 3: For ease of reference, let's add what the full resulting content topic format may look like. Will also make the example below a bit clearer.

`{generation}/{bias}/{application-name}/{version-of-the-application}/{content-topic-name}/{encoding}`

### Example

`/0/unbiased/myapp/1/mysub/cbor`

### Generation

> The generation number monotonously increase and indirectly refer to the total number of shards of the Waku network.

Reviewer 5: s/increase/insreases/ 
s/refer/refers/

Should it be  the Waku Network (assuming it is "the" official name?)

The first generation (zero) MUST use 8 shards in total.
The cluster index is 1 and the indices of each shards are numbered 0 to 7.

> This document will be updated for future generation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This document will be updated for future generations.
```

### Bias
Bias is used to skew the priority of shards via weights.
Other biases than `unbiased` are unspecified for now but may be used in the future.

### Topic Design

> Content topics have 2 purposes filtering and routing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Content topics have 2 purposes: filtering and routing.
```

> Filtering is done by changing the `subject` field.

Reviewer 3: What `subject` field? :D https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/23/#content-topic-format refers to `{content-topic-name}`. We could consider changing to `{subject}`, but should be consistent. For now I think `{content-topic-name}` is OK.

Author: :thinking: where did I saw subject...

As this part is not hashed, it will not affect routing (shard selection).
The `application` and `version` fields do affect routing.
Using multiple content topics with different `application` field has advantages and disadvantages.
It increase the traffic a relay node is subjected to when subscribed to all topics.

> It also allow relay and light nodes to subscribe to a subset of all topics.

Reviewer 5: s/allow/allows/

## Problems

### Hotspots

> Hot spots occur (similar to DHTs), when a specific mesh network (shard) becomes responsible for (several) large multicast groups (content topics).

Reviewer 5: so is it Hotspots or hot spots?

Author: English is weird man! IDK. Going to use Hot spots I guess.

Author: Rendez-vous -> Rendezvous :shrug: Its not even English that's French!
